# Udash i18n

The Udash framework supports internationalization of web applications. The Udash i18n plugin provides translations 
loading from the server-side application via RPC and allows locale changes in frontend application without refreshing.

## Translation keys

If you want to use Udash translations support, you should define `TranslationKey`s.

<iframe height="500px" frameborder="0" style="width: 100%" src="https://embed.scalafiddle.io/embed?sfid=fXxKhGF/0&layout=v99"></iframe>

`TranslationKey` knows the count and types of the arguments. In the above example, `retriesLeft` key expects 
one integer as the argument.

It is possible to transform translation key with arguments to `TranslationKey0` by calling `.reduce(<key_args>)`. 
You can also pass an `Untranslatable` as `TranslationKey0` instance in order to use raw string instead of translated key.

## TranslationProvider

When translation keys are defined, we can create `Translated` object as follows: 

<iframe height="400px" frameborder="0" style="width: 100%" src="https://embed.scalafiddle.io/embed?sfid=8RKp95m/0&layout=v70"></iframe>

This code requires a `TranslationProvider` instance to compile. The Udash i18n plugin provides 
two `TranslationProvider`s: `LocalTranslationProvider` and `RemoteTranslationProvider`.

### LocalTranslationProvider

`LocalTranslationProvider` was prepared for frontend-only applications. It takes a map from `Lang` to `Bundle`. 
Each bundle provides mapping from translation keys to translation templates.

<div id="frontend-translations-demo">
    <iframe height="800px" frameborder="0" style="width: 100%" src="https://embed.scalafiddle.io/embed?sfid=pUKfe1t/0&layout=v85"></iframe>
</div>

As you can see in the code sample, you can use `translated` method to bind translation into DOM hierarchy. 

### RemoteTranslationProvider

If your application is using the Udash RPC system, you can provide translations from the server side application. 
`RemoteTranslationProvider` takes `RemoteTranslationRPC` as constructor argument. It allows the frontend application 
to ask the server application for the translation templates.

#### RemoteTranslationRPC implementation

Let's start with `RemoteTranslationRPC` implementation in the server application. 
Add the following method in your server RPC interface: 

```scala
import io.udash.rpc._
import io.udash.i18n._

trait DemosServerRPC {
  def translations(): RemoteTranslationRPC
}

object DemosServerRPC 
  extends DefaultServerRpcCompanion[DemosServerRPC]
```

The Udash i18n plugin makes `RemoteTranslationRPC` easier, because it provides `TranslationRPCEndpoint` 
and `ResourceBundlesTranslationTemplatesProvider` classes.

```scala
import io.udash.i18n._
import java.{util => ju}

class TranslationServer extends TranslationRPCEndpoint(
  new ResourceBundlesTranslationTemplatesProvider(
    TranslationServer.langs
      .map(lang =>
        Lang(lang) -> TranslationServer.bundlesNames.map(name =>
          ju.ResourceBundle.getBundle(name, new ju.Locale(lang))
        )
      ).toMap
  )
)

object TranslationServer {
  val langs = Seq("en", "pl")
  val bundlesNames = Seq("demo_translations")
}
```

`ResourceBundlesTranslationTemplatesProvider` expects `Map[Lang, Seq[ju.ResourceBundle]]` as a constructor argument, 
whereas `TranslationRPCEndpoint` takes `ResourceBundlesTranslationTemplatesProvider` instance.
The presented implementation will serve translation templates from bundles from server application resources.

#### Frontend usage

Now it is possible to load translations into the frontend application using `RemoteTranslationProvider`. 
This provider loads required translation templates from server and caches them in provided storage. 
In the example below it is a browser local storage which keeps cached values for 6 hours.

<!-- TODO fix after new, Atmosphere-less RPC is merged -->
<div id="rpc-translations-demo">
    <iframe height="800px" frameborder="0" style="width: 100%" src="https://embed.scalafiddle.io/embed?sfid=lWjO6Q8/0&layout=v85"></iframe>
</div>

### Translations binding

All translations are resolved asynchronously, so they cannot be statically added into DOM hierarchy. 
The Udash i18n plugin provides four methods for translations binding. These methods are divided into two groups: 
static and dynamic.

#### Static binding

Static binding takes `Future[Translated]` as an argument and when it completes it puts translated string 
into DOM hierarchy:
 * `translated` - binds translated string in the DOM element.
 * `translatedAttr` - binds translated string in the DOM element attribute.
 
#### Dynamic binding

Dynamic binding is able to update translation after a change of `LangProperty`. 
These methods take the following arguments: a translation key, a translator which applies arguments 
to translation and the lang property:
 * `translatedDynamic` - binds translated string in the DOM element and updates it when the application language changes.
 * `translatedAttrDynamic` - binds translated string in the DOM element attribute and updates it when the application language changes.
 
<div id="dynamic-rpc-translations-demo">
    <iframe height="800px" frameborder="0" style="width: 100%" src="https://embed.scalafiddle.io/embed?sfid=QND5mXX/0&layout=v80"></iframe>
</div>